C O
HAPTER NE
U M
NITS AND EASUREMENT
1.1 INTRODUCTION
Measurement of any physical quantity involves comparison
with a certain basic, arbitrarily chosen, internationally
accepted reference standard called unit. The result of a
1.1 Introduction
measurement of a physical quantity is expressed by a
1.2 The international system of number (or numerical measure) accompanied by a unit.
units Although the number of physical quantities appears to be
very large, we need only a limited number of units for
1.3 Significant figures
expressing all the physical quantities, since they are inter-
1.4 Dimensions of physical
related with one another. The units for the fundamental or
quantities
base quantities are called fundamental or base units. The
1.5 Dimensional formulae and units of all other physical quantities can be expressed as
dimensional equations combinations of the base units. Such units obtained for the
1.6 Dimensional analysis and its derived quantities are called derived units. A complete set
of these units, both the base units and derived units, is
applications
known as the system of units.
Summary
Exercises 1.2 THE INTERNATIONAL SYSTEM OF UNITS
In earlier time scientists of different countries were using
different systems of units for measurement. Three such
systems, the CGS, the FPS (or British) system and the MKS
system were in use extensively till recently.
The base units for length, mass and time in these systems
were as follows :
· In CGS system they were centimetre, gram and second
respectively.
· In FPS system they were foot, pound and second
respectively.
· In MKS system they were metre, kilogram and second
respectively.
The system of units which is at present internationally
accepted for measurement is the Système International
é
d’ Unit s (French for International System of Units),
abbreviated as SI. The SI, with standard scheme of symbols,
units and abbreviations, developed by the Bureau
International des poids et mesures (The International Bureau
of Weights and Measures, BIPM) in 1971 were recently
revised by the General Conference on Weights and Measures
in November 2018. The scheme is now for international usage
Reprint 2026-27
2 PHYSICS
in scientific, technical, industrial and commercial work.
Because SI units used decimal system, conversions
within the system are quite simple and convenient. We
shall follow the SI units in
this book.
In SI, there are seven base units as given in
(a)
Table 1.1. Besides the seven base units, there are two
more units that are defined for (a) plane angle dq as the
ratio of length of arc ds to the radius r and (b) solid
angle dW as the ratio of the intercepted area dA of the
spherical surface, described about the apex O as the
centre, to the square of its radius r, as shown in
Fig. 1.1(a) and (b) respectively. The unit for plane angle
(b)
is radian with the symbol rad and the unit for the solid
angle is steradian with the symbol sr. Both these are Fig. 1.1 Description of (a) plane angle dq and
dimensionless quantities. (b) solid angle d.
Table 1.1 SI Base Quantities and Units*
Base SI Units
quantity Name Symbol Definition
Length metre m The metre is the SI unit of length. It is defined by taking the fixed numerical
value of the speed of light in vacuum c to be 299792458 when expressed
in the unit m s–1, where the second is defined in terms of the caesium
frequency Dn .
cs
Mass kilogram kg The kilogram is the SI unit of mass. It is defined by taking the fixed numerical
value of the Planck constant h to be 6.62607015´10–34 when expressed in
the unit J s, which is equal to kg m2 s–1, where the metre and the second are
defined in terms of c and Dn .
cs
Time second s The second is the SI unit of time. It is defined by taking the fixed numerical
value of the caesium frequency Dn , the unperturbed ground-state hyperfine
cs
transition frequency of the caesium-133 atom, to be 9192631770 when
expressed in the unit Hz, which is equal to s–1.
Electric ampere A The ampere is the SI unit of electric current. It is defined by taking the
current fixed numerical value of the elementary charge e to be 1.602176634´1019
when expressed in the unit C, which is equal to A s, where the second is
defined in terms of Dn .
cs
Thermo kelvin K The kelvin, symbol K, is the SI unit of thermodynamic temperature.
dynamic It is defined by taking the fixed numerical value of the Boltzmann constant
Temperature k to be 1.380649´10–23 when expressed in the unit J K–1, which is equal to
kg m2 s–2 k–1, where the kilogram, metre and second are defined in terms of
h, c and Dn .
cs
Amount of mole mol The mole is the SI unit of amount of substance. One mole contains exactly
substance 6.02214076´1023 elementary entities. This number is the fixed numerical
value of the Avogadro constant, N , when expressed in the unit mol–1 and is
A
called the Avogadro number. The amount of substance, symbol n, of a system
is a measure of the number of specified elementary entities. An elementary
entity may be an atom, a molecule, an ion, an electron, any other particle or
specified group of particles.
Luminous candela cd The candela is the SI unit of luminous intensity in given direction. It is defined
intensity by taking the fixed numerical value of the luminous efficacy of monochromatic
radiation of frequency 540´1012 Hz, K , to be 683 when expressed in the unit
cd
lm W–1, which is equal to cd sr W–1, or cd sr kg–1m–2s3, where the kilogram,
metre and second are defined in terms of h, c and Dn .
cs
* The values mentioned here need not be remembered or asked in a test. They are given here only to indicate the
extent of accuracy to which they are measured. With progress in technology, the measuring techniques get
improved leading to measurements with greater precision. The definitions of base units are revised to keep up
with this progress.
Reprint 2026-27
UNITS AND MEASUREMENT 3
Table 1.2 Some units retained for general use (Though outside SI)
Note that when mole is used, the elementary digits plus the first uncertain digit are known
entities must be specified. These entities as significant digits or significant figures. If
may be atoms, molecules, ions, electrons, we say the period of oscillation of a simple
other particles or specified groups of such pendulum is 1.62 s, the digits 1 and 6 are
particles. reliable and certain, while the digit 2 is
We employ units for some physical uncertain. Thus, the measured value has three
quantities that can be derived from the seven significant figures. The length of an object
base units (Appendix A 6). Some derived reported after measurement to be 287.5 cm has
units in terms of the SI base units are given four significant figures, the digits 2, 8, 7 are
in (Appendix A 6.1). Some SI derived units certain while the digit 5 is uncertain. Clearly,
are given special names (Appendix A 6.2 ) reporting the result of measurement that
and some derived SI units make use of these includes more digits than the significant digits
units with special names and the seven base is superfluous and also misleading since it
units (Appendix A 6.3). These are given in would give a wrong idea about the precision of
Appendix A 6.2 and A 6.3 for your ready measurement.
reference. Other units retained for general
The rules for determining the number of
use are given in Table 1.2.
significant figures can be understood from the
Common SI prefixes and symbols for multiples
following examples. Significant figures
and sub-multiples are given in Appendix A2.
indicate, as already mentioned, the precision
General guidelines for using symbols for physical
of measurement which depends on the least
quantities, chemical elements and nuclides are
count of the measuring instrument. A choice
given in Appendix A7 and those for SI units and
of change of different units does not
some other units are given in Appendix A8 for
change the number of significant digits or
your guidance and ready reference.
figures in a measurement. This important
1.3 SIGNIFICANT FIGURES remark makes most of the following
observations clear:
Every measurement involves errors. Thus, the
(1) For example, the length 2.308 cm has four
result of measurement should be reported in a
significant figures. But in different units, the
way that indicates the precision of
same value can be written as 0.02308 m or 23.08
measurement. Normally, the reported result of
measurement is a number that includes all mm or 23080 mm.
digits in the number that are known reliably All these numbers have the same number of
plus the first digit that is uncertain. The reliable significant figures (digits 2, 3, 0, 8), namely four.
Reprint 2026-27
4 PHYSICS
This shows that the location of decimal point is negative exponent (or power) of 10. In order to
of no consequence in determining the number get an approximate idea of the number, we may
of significant figures. round off the number a to 1 (for a ≤5) and to 10
The example gives the following rules : (for 5<a≤10). Then the number can be
• All the non-zero digits are significant. expressed approximately as 10b in which the
• exponent (or power) b of 10 is called order of
All the zeros between two non-zero digits
magnitude of the physical quantity. When only
are significant, no matter where the
an estimate is required, the quantity is of the
decimal point is, if at all.
order of 10b. For example, the diameter of the
•
If the number is less than 1, the zero(s) earth (1.28×107m) is of the order of 107m with
on the right of decimal point but to the the order of magnitude 7. The diameter of
left of the first non-zero digit are not hydrogen atom (1.06 ×10–10m) is of the order of
significant. [In 0.00 2308, the underlined 10–10m, with the order of magnitude
zeroes are not significant]. –10. Thus, the diameter of the earth is 17 orders
• of magnitude larger than the hydrogen atom.
The terminal or trailing zero(s) in a
It is often customary to write the decimal after
number without a decimal point are not
the first digit. Now the confusion mentioned in
significant.
(a) above disappears :
[Thus 123 m = 12300 cm = 123000 mm has 4.700 m = 4.700 × 102 cm
three significant figures, the trailing zero(s) = 4.700 × 103 mm = 4.700 × 10–3 km
being not significant.] However, you can also
The power of 10 is irrelevant to the
see the next observation.
determination of significant figures. However, all
•
The trailing zero(s) in a number with a zeroes appearing in the base number in the
decimal point are significant. scientific notation are significant. Each number
[The numbers 3.500 or 0.06900 have four in this case has four significant figures.
significant figures each.]
Thus, in the scientific notation, no confusion
(2) There can be some confusion regarding the arises about the trailing zero(s) in the base
trailing zero(s). Suppose a length is reported to number a. They are always significant.
be 4.700 m. It is evident that the zeroes here
(4) The scientific notation is ideal for reporting
are meant to convey the precision of
measurement. But if this is not adopted, we use
measurement and are, therefore, significant. [If
the rules adopted in the preceding example :
these were not, it would be superfluous to write
• For a number greater than 1, without any
them explicitly, the reported measurement
decimal, the trailing zero(s) are not
would have been simply 4.7 m]. Now suppose
we change units, then significant.
• For a number with a decimal, the trailing
4.700 m = 470.0 cm = 4700 mm = 0.004700 km
zero(s) are significant.
Since the last number has trailing zero(s) in a
number with no decimal, we would conclude (5) The digit 0 conventionally put on the left of a
erroneously from observation (1) above that the decimal for a number less than 1 (like 0.1250)
number has two significant figures, while in is never significant. However, the zeroes at the
fact, it has four significant figures and a mere end of such number are significant in a
change of units cannot change the number of measurement.
significant figures.
(6) The multiplying or dividing factors which are
(3) To remove such ambiguities in
neither rounded numbers nor numbers
determining the number of significant
representing measured values are exact and
figures, the best way is to report every
have infinite number of significant digits. For
measurement in scientific notation (in the
d
power of 10). In this notation, every number is example in r = or s = 2πr, the factor 2 is an
expressed as a × 10b, where a is a number 2
between 1 and 10, and b is any positive or exact number and it can be written as 2.0, 2.00
Reprint 2026-27
UNITS AND MEASUREMENT 5
decimal place. The final result should, therefore,
t
or 2.0000 as required. Similarly, in T  , n is be rounded off to 663.8 g.
n
Similarly, the difference in length can be
an exact number.
expressed as :
1.3.1 Rules for Arithmetic Operations with 0.307 m – 0.304 m = 0.003 m = 3 ×10–3 m.
Significant Figures
Note that we should not use the rule (1) applicable
The result of a calculation involving approximate
for multiplication and division and write 664 g as
measured values of quantities (i.e. values with
the result in the example of addition and
limited number of significant figures) must
3.00 × 10–3 m in the example of subtraction. They
reflect the uncertainties in the original
do not convey the precision of measurement
measured values. It cannot be more accurate
properly. For addition and subtraction, the rule
than the original measured values themselves
is in terms of decimal places.
on which the result is based. In general, the
final result should not have more significant 1.3.2 Rounding off the Uncertain Digits
figures than the original data from which it was
The result of computation with approximate
obtained. Thus, if mass of an object is measured
numbers, which contain more than one
to be, say, 4.237 g (four significant figures) and
uncertain digit, should be rounded off. The rules
its volume is measured to be 2.51 cm3, then its
for rounding off numbers to the appropriate
density, by mere arithmetic division, is
significant figures are obvious in most cases. A
1.68804780876 g/cm3 upto 11 decimal places.
number 2.746 rounded off to three significant
It would be clearly absurd and irrelevant to
figures is 2.75, while the number 1.743 would
record the calculated value of density to such a be 1.74. The rule by convention is that the
precision when the measurements on which the
preceding digit is raised by 1 if the
value is based, have much less precision. The
insignificant digit to be dropped (the
following rules for arithmetic operations with
underlined digit in this case) is more than
significant figures ensure that the final result
5, and is left unchanged if the latter is less
of a calculation is shown with the precision that
than 5. But what if the number is 2.745 in
is consistent with the precision of the input
which the insignificant digit is 5. Here, the
measured values :
convention is that if the preceding digit is
(1) In multiplication or division, the final
even, the insignificant digit is simply
result should retain as many significant
dropped and, if it is odd, the preceding digit
figures as are there in the original number
with the least significant figures. is raised by 1. Then, the number 2.745 rounded
Thus, in the example above, density should off to three significant figures becomes 2.74.
be reported to three significant figures. On the other hand, the number 2.735 rounded
off to three significant figures becomes 2.74
4.237g
Density  1.69 g cm -3 since the preceding digit is odd.
3
2.51 cm In any involved or complex multi-step
Similarly, if the speed of light is given as calculation, you should retain, in intermediate
3.00 × 108 m s-1 (three significant figure) and steps, one digit more than the significant digits
one year (1y = 365.25 d) has 3.1557 × 107 s (five and round off to proper significant figures at the
significant figures), the light year is 9.47 × 1015 m end of the calculation. Similarly, a number
(three significant figures). known to be within many significant figures,
such as in 2.99792458 ´ 108 m/s for the speed
(2) In addition or subtraction, the final result
of light in vacuum, is rounded off to an
should retain as many decimal places as are
approximate value 3 ´ 108 m/s , which is often
there in the number with the least
employed in computations. Finally, remember
decimal places.
that exact numbers that appear in formulae like
For example, the sum of the numbers
436.32 g, 227.2 g and 0.301 g by mere arithmetic
L
addition, is 663.821 g. But the least precise 2 p in T  2 , have a large (infinite) number
measurement (227.2 g) is correct to only one g
Reprint 2026-27
6 PHYSICS
of significant figures. The value of π =
= 16.2 cm ± 0.6 %.
3.1415926.... is known to a large number of
significant figures. You may take the value as Similarly, the breadth b may be written as
3.142 or 3.14 for π, with limited number of b = 10.1 ± 0.1 cm
significant figures as required in specific
= 10.1 cm ± 1 %
cases.
Then, the error of the product of two (or more)
⊳ Example 1.1 Each side of a cube is experimental values, using the combination of
measured to be 7.203 m. What are the errors rule, will be
total surface area and the volume of the
l b = 163.62 cm2 + 1.6%
cube to appropriate significant figures?
= 163.62 + 2.6 cm2
Answer The number of significant figures in
the measured length is 4. The calculated area This leads us to quote the final result as
and the volume should therefore be rounded off l b = 164 + 3 cm2
to 4 significant figures.
Here 3 cm2 is the uncertainty or error in the
Surface area of the cube = 6(7.203)2 m2 estimation of area of rectangular sheet.
= 311.299254 m2 (2) If a set of experimental data is specified
= 311.3 m2 to n significant figures, a result obtained by
combining the data will also be valid to n
Volume of the cube = (7.203)3 m3
significant figures.
= 373.714754 m3
However, if data are subtracted, the number of
= 373.7 m3 ⊳ significant figures can be reduced.
⊳ Example 1.2 5.74 g of a substance For example, 12.9 g – 7.06 g, both specified to
occupies 1.2 cm3. Express its density by three significant figures, cannot properly be
keeping the significant figures in view. evaluated as 5.84 g but only as 5.8 g, as
uncertainties in subtraction or addition combine
Answer There are 3 significant figures in the
in a different fashion (smallest number of
measured mass whereas there are only 2
decimal places rather than the number of
significant figures in the measured volume.
significant figures in any of the number added
Hence the density should be expressed to only
or subtracted).
2 significant figures.
(3) The relative error of a value of number
Density= 5.74 g cm −3 specified to significant figures depends not
1.2
only on n but also on the number itself.
= 4.8 g cm--3 . ⊳
For example, the accuracy in measurement of
mass 1.02 g is ± 0.01 g whereas another
1.3.3 Rules for Determining the Uncertainty
measurement 9.89 g is also accurate to ± 0.01 g.
in the Results of Arithmetic
The relative error in 1.02 g is
Calculations = (± 0.01/1.02) × 100 %
= ± 1%
The rules for determining the uncertainty or
Similarly, the relative error in 9.89 g is
error in the number/measured quantity in
= (± 0.01/9.89) × 100 %
arithmetic operations can be understood from
= ± 0.1 %
the following examples.
Finally, remember that intermediate results in
(1) If the length and breadth of a thin
rectangular sheet are measured, using a metre a multi-step computation should be
scale as 16.2 cm and, 10.1 cm respectively, there calculated to one more significant figure in
are three significant figures in each every measurement than the number of
measurement. It means that the length l may digits in the least precise measurement.
be written as These should be justified by the data and then
l = 16.2 ± 0.1 cm the arithmetic operations may be carried out;
Reprint 2026-27
UNITS AND MEASUREMENT 7
otherwise rounding errors can build up. For mass, one dimension in length, and –2
example, the reciprocal of 9.58, calculated (after dimensions in time. The dimensions in all other
rounding off) to the same number of significant base quantities are zero.
figures (three) is 0.104, but the reciprocal of Note that in this type of representation, the
magnitudes are not considered. It is the quality
0.104 calculated to three significant figures is
of the type of the physical quantity that enters.
9.62. However, if we had written 1/9.58 = 0.1044
Thus, a change in velocity, initial velocity,
and then taken the reciprocal to three significant
average velocity, final velocity, and speed are
figures, we would have retrieved the original
all equivalent in this context. Since all these
value of 9.58. quantities can be expressed as length/time,
This example justifies the idea to retain one their dimensions are [L]/[T] or [L T–1].
more extra digit (than the number of digits in
the least precise measurement) in intermediate 1.5 DIMENSIONAL FORMULAE AND
steps of the complex multi-step calculations in DIMENSIONAL EQUATIONS
order to avoid additional errors in the process The expression which shows how and which of
of rounding off the numbers. the base quantities represent the dimensions
of a physical quantity is called the dimensional
1.4 DIMENSIONS OF PHYSICAL QUANTITIES formula of the given physical quantity. For
example, the dimensional formula of the volume
The nature of a physical quantity is described
is [M° L3 T°], and that of speed or velocity is
by its dimensions. All the physical quantities
[M° L T-1]. Similarly, [M° L T–2] is the dimensional
represented by derived units can be expressed formula of acceleration and [M L–3 T°] that of
in terms of some combination of seven mass density.
fundamental or base quantities. We shall call An equation obtained by equating a physical
these base quantities as the seven dimensions quantity with its dimensional formula is called
of the physical world, which are denoted with the dimensional equation of the physical
square brackets [ ]. Thus, length has the quantity. Thus, the dimensional equations are
dimension [L], mass [M], time [T], electric current the equations, which represent the dimensions
[A], thermodynamic temperature [K], luminous of a physical quantity in terms of the base
intensity [cd], and amount of substance [mol]. quantities. For example, the dimensional
The dimensions of a physical quantity are the equations of volume [V], speed [v], force [F] and
ρ
powers (or exponents) to which the base mass density [ ] may be expressed as
quantities are raised to represent that
[V] = [M0 L3 T0]
quantity. Note that using the square brackets
[v] = [M0 L T–1]
[ ] round a quantity means that we are dealing
[F] = [M L T–2]
with ‘the dimensions of’ the quantity. ρ
[ ] = [M L–3 T0]
In mechanics, all the physical quantities can
be written in terms of the dimensions [L], [M] The dimensional equation can be obtained
and [T]. For example, the volume occupied by from the equation representing the relations
between the physical quantities. The
an object is expressed as the product of length,
dimensional formulae of a large number and
breadth and height, or three lengths. Hence the
wide variety of physical quantities, derived from
dimensions of volume are [L] × [L] × [L] = [L]3 = [L3].
the equations representing the relationships
As the volume is independent of mass and time,
among other physical quantities and expressed
it is said to possess zero dimension in mass [M°],
in terms of base quantities are given in
zero dimension in time [T°] and three
Appendix 9 for your guidance and ready
dimensions in length.
reference.
Similarly, force, as the product of mass and
acceleration, can be expressed as 1.6 DIMENSIONAL ANALYSIS AND ITS
Force = mass × acceleration APPLICATIONS
= mass × (length)/(time)2
The recognition of concepts of dimensions, which
The dimensions of force are [M] [L]/[T]2 = guide the description of physical behaviour is
[M L T–2]. Thus, the force has one dimension in of basic importance as only those physical
Reprint 2026-27
8 PHYSICS
quantities can be added or subtracted which such as angle as the ratio (length/length),
have the same dimensions. A thorough refractive index as the ratio (speed of light in
understanding of dimensional analysis helps us vacuum/speed of light in medium) etc., has no
in deducing certain relations among different dimensions.
physical quantities and checking the derivation, Now we can test the dimensional consistency
accuracy and dimensional consistency or
or homogeneity of the equation
homogeneity of various mathematical
expressions. When magnitudes of two or more x = x +v t +( 1/2 ) a t2
0 0
physical quantities are multiplied, their units for the distance x travelled by a particle or body
should be treated in the same manner as
in time t which starts from the position x with
ordinary algebraic symbols. We can cancel 0
an initial velocity v at time t = 0 and has uniform
identical units in the numerator and 0
acceleration a along the direction of motion.
denominator. The same is true for dimensions
The dimensions of each term may be written as
of a physical quantity. Similarly, physical
[x] = [L]
quantities represented by symbols on both sides
[x ] = [L]
of a mathematical equation must have the same 0
[v t] = [L T–1] [T]
dimensions. 0
= [L]
[(1/2) a t2] = [L T–2] [T2]
1.6.1 Checking the Dimensional
Consistency of Equations = [L]
As each term on the right hand side of this
The magnitudes of physical quantities may be
equation has the same dimension, namely that
added together or subtracted from one another
of length, which is same as the dimension of
only if they have the same dimensions. In other left hand side of the equation, hence this
words, we can add or subtract similar physical equation is a dimensionally correct equation.
quantities. Thus, velocity cannot be added to It may be noted that a test of consistency of
force, or an electric current cannot be subtracted dimensions tells us no more and no less than a
from the thermodynamic temperature. This test of consistency of units, but has the
simple principle called the principle of advantage that we need not commit ourselves
homogeneity of dimensions in an equation is to a particular choice of units, and we need not
extremely useful in checking the correctness of worry about conversions among multiples and
an equation. If the dimensions of all the terms sub-multiples of the units. It may be borne in
are not same, the equation is wrong. Hence, if mind that if an equation fails this consistency
we derive an expression for the length (or test, it is proved wrong, but if it passes, it is
distance) of an object, regardless of the symbols not proved right. Thus, a dimensionally correct
appearing in the original mathematical relation, equation need not be actually an exact
when all the individual dimensions are (correct) equation, but a dimensionally wrong
simplified, the remaining dimension must be (incorrect) or inconsistent equation must be
that of length. Similarly, if we derive an equation wrong.
of speed, the dimensions on both the sides of
equation, when simplified, must be of length/
⊳ Example 1.3 Let us consider an equation
time, or [L T–1].
Dimensions are customarily used as a 1 m v2 =m g h
preliminary test of the consistency of an 2
equation, when there is some doubt about the where m is the mass of the body, v its
correctness of the equation. However, the velocity, g is the acceleration due to
dimensional consistency does not guarantee gravity and h is the height. Check
correct equations. It is uncertain to the extent whether this equation is dimensionally
of dimensionless quantities or functions. The correct.
arguments of special functions, such as the
trigonometric, logarithmic and exponential Answer The dimensions of LHS are
functions must be dimensionless. A pure [M] [L T–1 ]2 = [M] [ L2 T–2]
number, ratio of similar physical quantities, = [M L2 T–2]
Reprint 2026-27
UNITS AND MEASUREMENT 9
The dimensions of RHS are string, that oscillates under the action of
[M][L T–2] [L] = [M][L2 T–2] the force of gravity. Suppose that the period
= [M L2 T–2] of oscillation of the simple pendulum
depends on its length (l), mass of the bob
The dimensions of LHS and RHS are the same and
hence the equation is dimensionally correct. ⊳ (m) and acceleration due to gravity (g).
Derive the expression for its time period
using method of dimensions.
⊳ Example 1.4 The SI unit of energy is
J = kg m2 s–2; that of speed v is m s–1 and
Answer The dependence of time period T on
of acceleration a is m s–2. Which of the
the quantities l, g and m as a product may be
formulae for kinetic energy (K) given below
written as :
can you rule out on the basis of
T = k lx gy mz
dimensional arguments (m stands for the
mass of the body) : where k is dimensionless constant and x, y
(a) K = m2 v3 and z are the exponents.
(b) K = (1/2)mv2 By considering dimensions on both sides, we
(c) K = ma have
(d) K = (3/16)mv2 [LoMoT1]=[L1]x [L1T–2]y[M1]z
(e) K = (1/2)mv2 + ma
= Lx+y T–2y Mz
Answer Every correct formula or equation must On equating the dimensions on both sides,
have the same dimensions on both sides of the we have
equation. Also, only quantities with the same x + y = 0; –2y = 1; and z = 0
physical dimensions can be added or
1 1
subtracted. The dimensions of the quantity on So that x = ,y = – ,z =0
2 2
the right side are [M2 L3 T–3] for (a); [M L2 T–2] for
(b) and (d); [M L T–2] for (c). The quantity on the Then, T = k l½ g–½
right side of (e) has no proper dimensions since
two quantities of different dimensions have been l
or, T = k
added. Since the kinetic energy K has the g
dimensions of [M L2 T–2], formulas (a), (c) and (e)
Note that value of constant k can not be obtained
are ruled out. Note that dimensional arguments
by the method of dimensions. Here it does not
cannot tell which of the two, (b) or (d), is the
matter if some number multiplies the right side
correct formula. For this, one must turn to the
of this formula, because that does not affect its
actual definition of kinetic energy (see
dimensions.
Chapter 5). The correct formula for kinetic
energy is given by (b). ⊳
l
Actually, k = 2p so that T = 2p ⊳
1.6.2 Deducing Relation among the g
Physical Quantities
The method of dimensions can sometimes be Dimensional analysis is very useful in deducing
used to deduce relation among the physical relations among the interdependent physical
quantities. For this we should know the quantities. However, dimensionless constants
dependence of the physical quantity on other cannot be obtained by this method. The method
quantities (upto three physical quantities or of dimensions can only test the dimensional
linearly independent variables) and consider it validity, but not the exact relationship between
as a product type of the dependence. Let us take physical quantities in any equation. It does not
an example. distinguish between the physical quantities
having same dimensions.
⊳ Example 1.5 Consider a simple A number of exercises at the end of this
pendulum, having a bob attached to a chapter will help you develop skill in
dimensional analysis.
Reprint 2026-27
10 PHYSICS
SUMMARY
1. Physics is a quantitative science, based on measurement of physical quantities. Certain
physical quantities have been chosen as fundamental or base quantities (such as
length, mass, time, electric current, thermodynamic temperature, amount of substance,
and luminous intensity).
2. Each base quantity is defined in terms of a certain basic, arbitrarily chosen but properly
standardised reference standard called unit (such as metre, kilogram, second, ampere,
kelvin, mole and candela). The units for the fundamental or base quantities are called
fundamental or base units.
3. Other physical quantities, derived from the base quantities, can be expressed as a
combination of the base units and are called derived units. A complete set of units,
both fundamental and derived, is called a system of units.
4. The International System of Units (SI) based on seven base units is at present
internationally accepted unit system and is widely used throughout the world.
5. The SI units are used in all physical measurements, for both the base quantities and
the derived quantities obtained from them. Certain derived units are expressed by
means of SI units with special names (such as joule, newton, watt, etc).
6. The SI units have well defined and internationally accepted unit symbols (such as m
for metre, kg for kilogram, s for second, A for ampere, N for newton etc.).
7. Physical measurements are usually expressed for small and large quantities in scientific
notation, with powers of 10. Scientific notation and the prefixes are used to simplify
measurement notation and numerical computation, giving indication to the precision
of the numbers.
8. Certain general rules and guidelines must be followed for using notations for physical
quantities and standard symbols for SI units, some other units and SI prefixes for
expressing properly the physical quantities and measurements.
9. In computing any physical quantity, the units for derived quantities involved in the
relationship(s) are treated as though they were algebraic quantities till the desired
units are obtained.
10. In measured and computed quantities proper significant figures only should be retained.
Rules for determining the number of significant figures, carrying out arithmetic
operations with them, and ‘rounding off ‘ the uncertain digits must be followed.
11. The dimensions of base quantities and combination of these dimensions describe
the nature of physical quantities. Dimensional analysis can be used to check the
dimensional consistency of equations, deducing relations among the physical
quantities, etc. A dimensionally consistent equation need not be actually an
exact (correct) equation, but a dimensionally wrong or inconsistent equation
must be wrong.
EXERCISES
Note : In stating numerical answers, take care of significant figures.
1.1 Fill in the blanks
(a) The volume of a cube of side 1 cm is equal to .....m3
(b) The surface area of a solid cylinder of radius 2.0 cm and height 10.0 cm is equal to
...(mm)2
(c) A vehicle moving with a speed of 18 km h–1 covers....m in 1 s
(d) The relative density of lead is 11.3. Its density is ....g cm–3 or ....kg m–3.
1.2 Fill in the blanks by suitable conversion of units
(a) 1 kg m2 s–2 = ....g cm2 s–2
(b) 1 m = ..... ly
(c) 3.0 m s–2 = .... km h–2
(d) G = 6.67 × 10–11 N m2 (kg)–2 = .... (cm)3 s–2 g–1.
Reprint 2026-27
UNITS AND MEASUREMENT 11
1.3 A calorie is a unit of heat (energy in transit) and it equals about 4.2 J where 1J =
1 kg m2 s–2. Suppose we employ a system of units in which the unit of mass equals α
kg, the unit of length equals β m, the unit of time is γ s. Show that a calorie has a
magnitude 4.2 α–1 β–2 γ2 in terms of the new units.
1.4 Explain this statement clearly :
“To call a dimensional quantity ‘large’ or ‘small’ is meaningless without specifying a
standard for comparison”. In view of this, reframe the following statements wherever
necessary :
(a) atoms are very small objects
(b) a jet plane moves with great speed
(c) the mass of Jupiter is very large
(d) the air inside this room contains a large number of molecules
(e) a proton is much more massive than an electron
(f) the speed of sound is much smaller than the speed of light.
1.5 A new unit of length is chosen such that the speed of light in vacuum is unity. What
is the distance between the Sun and the Earth in terms of the new unit if light takes
8 min and 20 s to cover this distance ?
1.6 Which of the following is the most precise device for measuring length :
(a) a vernier callipers with 20 divisions on the sliding scale
(b) a screw gauge of pitch 1 mm and 100 divisions on the circular scale
(c) an optical instrument that can measure length to within a wavelength of light ?
1.7 A student measures the thickness of a human hair by looking at it through a
microscope of magnification 100. He makes 20 observations and finds that the average
width of the hair in the field of view of the microscope is 3.5 mm. What is the
estimate on the thickness of hair ?
1.8 Answer the following :
(a)You are given a thread and a metre scale. How will you estimate the diameter of
the thread ?
(b)A screw gauge has a pitch of 1.0 mm and 200 divisions on the circular scale. Do
you think it is possible to increase the accuracy of the screw gauge arbitrarily by
increasingthe number of divisions on the circular scale ?
(c)The mean diameter of a thin brass rod is to be measured by vernier callipers. Why
is a set of 100 measurements of the diameter expected to yield a more reliable
estimate than a set of 5 measurements only ?
1.9 The photograph of a house occupies an area of 1.75 cm2 on a 35 mm slide. The slide
is projected on to a screen, and the area of the house on the screen is 1.55 m2. What
is the linear magnification of the projector-screen arrangement.
1.10 State the number of significant figures in the following :
(a) 0.007 m2
(b) 2.64 × 1024 kg
(c) 0.2370 g cm–3
(d) 6.320 J
(e) 6.032 N m–2
(f) 0.0006032 m2
1.11 The length, breadth and thickness of a rectangular sheet of metal are 4.234 m, 1.005 m, and
2.01 cm respectively. Give the area and volume of the sheet to correct significant figures.
1.12 The mass of a box measured by a grocer’s balance is 2.30 kg. Two gold pieces of
masses 20.15 g and 20.17 g are added to the box. What is (a) the total mass of the
box, (b) the difference in the masses of the pieces to correct significant figures ?
1.13 A famous relation in physics relates ‘moving mass’ m to the ‘rest mass’ m of a
o
particle in terms of its speed v and the speed of light, c. (This relation first arose as
a consequence of special relativity due to Albert Einstein). A boy recalls the relation
almost correctly but forgets where to put the constant c. He writes :
m
m = ( 0 )
1−v 2 1/2 .
Guess where to put the missing c.
Reprint 2026-27
12 PHYSICS
1.14 The unit of length convenient on the atomic scale is known as an angstrom and is
denoted by Å : 1 Å = 10–10 m. The size of a hydrogen atom is about 0.5 Å . What is the
total atomic volume in m3 of a mole of hydrogen atoms ?
1.15 One mole of an ideal gas at standard temperature and pressure occupies 22.4 L
(molar volume). What is the ratio of molar volume to the atomic volume of a mole of
Å
hydrogen ? (Take the size of hydrogen molecule to be about 1 ). Why is this ratio
so large ?
1.16 Explain this common observation clearly : If you look out of the window of a fast
moving train, the nearby trees, houses etc. seem to move rapidly in a direction opposite
to the train’s motion, but the distant objects (hill tops, the Moon, the stars etc.)
seem to be stationary. (In fact, since you are aware that you are moving, these
distant objects seem to move with you).
1.17 The Sun is a hot plasma (ionized matter) with its inner core at a temperature exceeding
107 K, and its outer surface at a temperature of about 6000 K. At these high
temperatures, no substance remains in a solid or liquid phase. In what range do you
expect the mass density of the Sun to be, in the range of densities of solids and
liquids or gases ? Check if your guess is correct from the following data : mass of the
Sun = 2.0 ×1030 kg, radius of the Sun = 7.0 × 108 m.
Reprint 2026-27
